ECLOGUE Ι

MELIBOEUS

But we must go hence—some to the thirsty
Africans, some to reach Scythia and Crete’s swift
Oaxes, and the Britons, wholly sundered from all
the world. Ah, shall 1 ever, long years hence, look
again on my country’s bounds, on my humble cottage
with its turs-clad roos—shall Ι, long years hence,
look amazed on a few ears of corn, once my king-
dom? Is a godless soldier to hold these well-tilled
fallows? a barbarian these crops? ‘See to what
strife has brought our unhappy citizens! For these
have we sown our fields 1 Now, Meliboeus, graft your
pears, plant your vines in rows! Away, my goats!
Away, once happy flock! No more, stretched in
some mossy grot, shall Ι watch you in the distance
hanging from a bushy crag; no more songs shall I
sing3 no more, my goats, under my tending‚ shall
you crop flowering lucerne and bitter willows!

TITYRUS

Yet this night you might have rested here with me
on the green leafage. We have ripe apples, mealy
chestnuts, and a wealth of pressed cheeses. Even
now the house—tops yonder are smoking and longer
shadows fall from the mountain-height&

