AENEID BOOK II

caught me by the hand and stayed me, thus, too,
speaking with roseate lips: ‘ My son, what resent-
ment thus stirs ungovernable wrath ? Why this rage?
or whither 1135 thy care for me fied ? Wilt thou not
first see where thou hast left thy father, age-worn
Anchises, whetherrCreiisa thy wife and the boy
Ascanius still live? All these the Greek lines com-
pass round on every side, and did not my love pre-
vent, ere this the flames had swept them off and the
hostile sword had drunk their blood. Know that it
is not the hated face of the Laconian woman, daughter
of Tyndareus3 it is not Paris that is to blame; but
the gods, the relentless gods, overturn this wealth and
make Troy topple from her pinnacle. Behold—sor all
the cloud, which now, drawn over thy sight, dulls thy
inortal vision and with dank pall enshrouds thee, Ι
will tear away; fear thou no commands ofthy mother
nor rei'use to obey her counsels—here, where thou
seest shattered piles and rocks torn from rocks, and
smoke eddying up mixed with dust, Neptune shakes
the walls and foundations that his mighty trident
hath upheaved, and uproots all the city from her
base. Here Juno, fiercest of all, is foremost to
hold the Scaean gates and, girt with steel, furiously
calls from the ships her allied band. Now on the
highest towers—turn and see—Tritonian Pallas is
planted, gleaming with storin-cloud and grim Gorgon.
The Sire himself gives the Greeks ‘courage and
auspicious strength3 he himself stirs up the gods
against the Dardan arms. Haste thy ssight, my son,
and put an end to thy toil. Never will I leave thee,

1 but will set thee safely on thy father’s threshold.’

¹ She spoke, and vanished 111 the thick shades ot
night. Dread shapes come to view—mighty powers
divine, warring against Troy.

335

